no more laces
#############
:date: 2019-05-25 23:30
:author: jaredj
:category: Keyboards

I started the Dactyl Marshmallow for two reasons: (1) I wanted a
keyboard that looked like a Datassette; (2) I couldn't print the
entire Dactyl on the printer I had access to.

Quickly I came up with some glue paddles that enabled printing the
frame in pieces. They worked! Hurrah! I turned my attention to the
sides: what should they be shaped like, and how? Then, how should they
be split into pieces? There were many challengesâ€”but are they not
written in the book of the annals of this usual guy who decided to
make a keyboard this one time?

Then I needed to make the bottom. Now, since it was even wider than
the frame, it was clear it would need to be printed in pieces. And
they would all be curved, and how do you clamp that? Then it was that
I seized upon the idea of putting holes on either side of the joints
and threading fishing line through, just like shoelaces. It would
press the sides together, no matter what shape they were! Some care
was still necessary to make sure the pieces wouldn't slide when tied,
so I made the joints have wavy edges. Pressure together would press
them into alignment. A bunch of playing with the holes, a bunch of
playing with the waves, to try to get the best fit with the least
post-processing.

Now I see they will never work like I want. Just like shoelaces, when
you pull tight, it only pulls on one or two rows of holes. The ones
after stay loose. It will always be more like sewing: pull this one
tight, retain tension while stitching the next one, and maybe make
some stitches at the end to pull other stitches tighter. Even then, I
couldn't adjust my waves well enough for the pressure together to
preclude sliding; and even the tightest stitches don't stop bending of
the joint.

A new idea has been growing in my head: parallel blocks extend from
the top and bottom of the bottom plate on either side of each
joint. Slic3r's modifier meshes are used to make the area close to the
surface solid. The blocks are used for clamping, then cut off
afterward.

Or I give up on splitting the bottom into pieces. My printer these
days has a square build volume, and several months with a 40% keyboard
have shown me I don't need as many keys as I thought. Maybe I could
just print one piece. Heck, now that I own my own printer and can
print all night, I could print a solid bottom rather than gluing legs
on. If there's anything I've learned in general, it's that glue joints
ar not as easy as I thought.
