Fork TheHive 4
##############
:date: 2022-07-03 15:02
:author: jaredj
:category: TheHive
:tags: security, community, agpl

`TheHive <https://thehive-project.org/>`_ purports to provide
"security incident response for the masses." It's "designed to make
life easier for [security operations centers], [computer security
incident response teams], [computer emergency response teams] and any
information security practitioner dealing with security incidents that
need to be investigated and acted upon swiftly."

`StrangeBee <https://www.strangebee.com/>`_, the company set up by the
creators of TheHive, `announced
<https://medium.com/strangebee-announcements/thehive-turns-5-and-adopts-a-model-shaped-for-the-future-95f908719c31>`_
that TheHive 5 would not be open-source software, and that they would
stop maintaining TheHive 4 at the end of 2022. You should go read
their blog articles, and if you want to pay someone to maintain your
software rather than taking part yourself, you should consider paying
them money. But "incident response for the masses" should continue,
and that will happen by forking TheHive 4.

So I'll just click the "fork" button in GitHub, and voila, I'm
doneâ€”right? In fact, 500 people have done that before me, so why write
a blog post about it? In fact this blog post is one initial part of
the difference: I'm asking you to join me if you care about
open-source security incident response. And it takes time to build a
community, so we have to start now.

I have some ideas about where to take TheHive and its friends. You'll
find some of them in older articles of this blog. But it's important
that we talk about those together. The original creators faced burnout
and their answer was to raise the asking price of their time. That is
their prerogative! But they also allowed for the community to take up
TheHive4 and run with it. If you want to do that, I want to help.

The provisional name of this effort is "TheHive4rk," pronounced "the
hive fork," in tribute to the creators and history of the project. The
demands of trademark law and of courtesy will probably cause the name
to change quickly.

Please join `TheHive4rk Matrix space
<https://matrix.to/#/#thehive4rk:lurk.agrue.info>`_ and let's talk
about a community-built future of security incident response.
