xah read my blog
################
:date: 2018-04-25 13:40
:author: jaredj
:category: Uncategorized

Omg! I went to `xah lee's emacs blog <http://ergoemacs.org/emacs/blog.html>`_
and saw my own post written about there. I feel like a screaming fan who
has just been noticed by a rock star!

"The question is, what command you want to put to [keys like the
backslash that presently self-insert in command mode]?" I am delighted
that wasting the key never occurred to you, Xah!—but that's what vi
does: if you type something in command mode that isn't one of the
commands, it just beeps and tells you you are in command mode.

I've come to depend on this, to expect that if I type a character and
then see it on the screen, I'm in insert mode. You might think that I
would just look at the bottom of the screen for the big bold "--
INSERT --" indicator in vi, or the mode indicator xah-fly-keys
provides. But I don't. The shape of the cursor when I'm running Emacs
in a GUI is a good indicator, and the color of my telephone-line is
possibly a better one, being peripherally viewable and not involving
the deciphering of a symbol.

On the subject of a numerical editing style, Xah, you are right to say
that this design is an artifact of slow-updating terminals, and an
anachronism in our modern world. But it is also a little language
spoken to your editor, like your editor is some kind of agent, in
contrast to pushing a button and watching what happens, which is a
more object-like interaction. Interaction with an object is improved
by making state changes visible and instant. But language-based
interaction rewards a bit of abstract thought about how to express the
change you want, particularly when there is some constriction in
bandwidth between you and the agent you are interacting with. This
object-versus-agent idea is the same thing I like about command-line
interfaces over against `point-and-grunt
<http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/taouu/html/pr01.html>`_ GUIs, and
the reason I like to use a text editor and write text files in the
first place, which distill what I want the computer to do, rather than
ticking a box on some property panel.

In an age of increasing mobility, I find bandwidth constrictions
everywhere: small displays, lack of a keyboard, and, yes, varying cell
signal strength. Apps (native or web) help me do special-purpose
computing in the presence of these constraints, but I want to do
`general-purpose computing
<https://boingboing.net/2012/01/10/lockdown.html>`_. I found the
`cyberdeck subreddit <https://reddit.com/r/cyberdeck>`_ this week, and
was intrigued by the foundational idea, from fiction, of a brain
interface with a keyboard. It solves the mobile display problem quite
nicely—high bandwidth from the computer to your brain—why wouldn't you
expect that your thoughts would be a similarly high-bandwidth mobile
input to a computer? But a keyboard is a prism for more focused,
rational thought, the way to be the pilot of a computer rather than
its passenger. Unfortunately most of the cyberdecks I saw that people
had actually built were woefully unusable, many with displays that are
coplanar with a keyboard. But in these objects I saw a yearning for
mobile, user-controlled computing.

Well, that got a bit general, didn't it. :)

There are some important things I didn't know about xah-fly-keys when
I wrote in September, and there are still important things I don't use
properly about it. Despite minor annoyances, every time since
September that I try to move to ErgoEmacs or evil, I end up back at
xah-fly-keys.
